Mute there and, um, we'll get underway.
So good. A just check. We can hear you.
Can you hear me, Kia? Yeah. No, we can. Thank you.
We've, um, five minutes with you.
Uh, um, time is time is yours. We'll start now. Oh,
I have my, um, I have two others tapping in with me. Oh,
You okay. Uh, we'll
just check we, before we start then.
Uh, could you, could you
check, uh, what are, what are their names?
We'll just, uh, get the clerk to,
Uh, Celine, Celine George and Isabella, uh, ny.
Okay. We'll just get 'em to join now. Thanks. Thank
You.
There we go. Alright, Chair, we are ready to go now.
Okay, we'll start, start now. Uh, thank you to Iwi.
Uh, um, I have taken my time for oral submission
to hand it over to two, uh,
w Maori who've been in care from, so part of my role is
to open up and hold space for them.
So we have Celine George, um, who will give us our opening.
Um, and then we will finish up Isabella, um, Kenny,
who will give some closing remarks
and some recommendations for the committee
to consider. Over to you, Celine.
Thank you. And welcome.
Um, this bill places
yet another exhausting burden on W Maori
who are already carrying the responsibility
of raising the next generation in a system that continues
to fail Una instead of resourcing,
it relies on the unpaid labor cultural knowledge
and resilience to absorb the impacts of policy decisions.
That is not partnership, and it is not t honoring practice.
It is cultural ex extraction.
At the same time, the spill advances punitive responses.
Funding is being stripped from Maori wellbeing.
Approaches that are grounded in our realities
and have demonstrated impact.
Ana ma across
and specific restorative pro programs are being forced
to survive through voluntary labor.
Our people are now filling the gaps of a system
that places our tamari and harm and then withdraw support.
This is not a failure of Maori.
It is a failure of the crown to invest in what works.
You have been provided with the research that,
and data that clearly shows bootcamps are, are ineffective.
The first iteration has already been in utter shambles.
Repeating a failed model while ignoring evidence-based Maori
solutions is not innovation.
It is an ideological stubbornness.
Our are not experiments
and policy should not be driven
by political optics over proven outcomes.
From listening comes, knowledge from knowledge comes
understanding from understanding comes wisdom.
And from wisdom comes wellbeing. Pass it over to my sister.
Is it,
Uh, Kiara?
Um, I would like to make some points.
Um, survivor support must be accessible, trauma-informed
and culturally safe mandate,
accessible trauma-informed support delivered
by a workforce trained in tikanga Maori cultural safety
and trauma-informed practice is important.
This bill fails survivors by not guaranteeing the quality
or cultural competence of the support they receive.
Survivors cannot be expected to reenter unsafe systems
or educate those meant to help them
without mandatory training.
In tikanga, Maori
and trauma-informed practice redress risks.
Retraumatization rather than healing
support must meet survivors where they are not
where the system is comfortable.
Redress must also be independent survivor led
and Maori governed establish a dedicated independence, uh,
uh, statutory redress agency and governance led by survivors
and UA redress cannot be credible if it remains controlled
by the same system that caused harm.
Independence is not optional. It is foundational to trust.
Survivors in UA must sit at the governance table, not
as advisors, but as decision makers.
Without this, the bill risks becoming another administrative
exercise rather than genuine pathway
to justice and accountability.
Finally, Maori LED pathways must address intergenerational
harm, prioritize Maori led healing pathways that recognize
and respond to inter intergenerational trauma
affecting whanau, ana and descendants.
Abuse and state care does not end with the survivor.
It ripples through generations.
This bill narrowly frame frames harm as individual
and historic for when, when for Maori, it is collective
and ongoing healing must be whanau centered
and centered, grounded in reconnection,
restoration and Maori defined wellbeing.
Maori already know what's wor what works for Maori whanau.
The bell must resource and center those solutions.
Thank you. We welcome any questions?
Oh, thank, thank you very much, um, Celine,
Isabella, and, and to here we are.
Um, I think we are almost at time,
but look, I just wanna say, um, I think a lot
of politicians could learn from a lot from you about how
to make very concise, um, powerful submissions.
So I just wanna congratulate you on that.
You've got us, uh, something to think about.
So thank you all of you
and Nexter is, uh, Kay Jones.
Welcome. Okay.
Okay. We have five minutes with you this afternoon.
The time is yours,
Kira.
Um, as you know, my name is Kay Jones.
I'm fifth generation, um, and Phan, new Zealander
and third generation Wellingtonian.
I'm not a lawyer, although I have drafted law.
I'm not a survivor of care, although I have friends who are,
and I have attended Whoi
and have heard directly from people who have survived
and who have been looking forward to getting some form
of compensation to help 'em deal with the health issues
that they're still experiencing from years of
abuse, including rape
by people within state institutions.
The reason that I'm here today is in part
because my grandmother was an elder in her church,
and she said, and she taught us,
if we see something bad happening, speak up.
Even if we can't change it, we have a duty to witness that.
So when I see this bill coming here right
before Christmas, it reminds me of the grin
who stole Christmas, the Christmas Carol,
where Ebenezer Scrooge was confronted by ghosts.
And I feel that this is the types of stories that, um,
members of parliament need to be reflecting on,
perhaps reading Aaron Smails, um, taken
by the state account in, um, newsroom this week
that came out yesterday.
Of course, you will have, I hope, read the full abuse
and care document
and know the long-term harms that have been caused people.
Now I'm a parent
and a former teacher,
which means I have been in loco parentis,
and that means having responsibility to people in my care.
And that care does not disappear just
because a class may have ended.
The state has been in loco parentis for all
of those young people who are now older adults who've been
taken into care, abused,
and they have a duty of care that they have failed.
The bill tries to say, oh,
if you did something years afterwards, you are not, um,
going to get compensation
for something that happened earlier.
Well, it's simply false legal reasoning
because each event is separate
and the state has got perfect ability
to look at those things separately.
The same with the apology.
That's a ology if it's not actually going
to make any real difference to the people who were harmed.
So I'm not going to read much.
I would be very happy to answer questions from my years
of listening to people,
but I don't know that it would make any difference.
So I'm simply here to say in my t-shirt,
which is from just speak says,
build communities, not prisons.
And it's that whole thing.
We need to look at the holistic of
what can the government do for better, not for
multiply harming people, making them angry or despondent
or causing suicides or, or whatever.
I mean, like, you have a duty to do better.
Thank, thank you. Um, look, just,
I ask a question on the point made about the, um,
legislation enable the individual circumstances
to be taken into account because, um,
have you had a look at the fact that that can be for the,
you know, obviously the majority of people won't, won't,
Won't. I've read the, the
law, but I've also an experienced public
servant before I retired.
And the way this is set up, a, it is a really bad signal
to the people who have been in the system so that some
of them will not be in that situation.
But I'm sorry, I do not have faith in people getting
what they are due in the first instance.
And then if there are subsequent issues that need
to be dealt with, because I mean, somebody
who is wanting surgery
for the rapes they suffered in prison isn't going to be, um,
sort of saying, look, oh, I can get
what I need have afterwards.
It's like, you need to do the, the fixing first
before saying, okay,
you subsequently acted exactly the same way
that maybe the gang
who were the only people showing you compassion
or support that took you in
and encouraged you to act in a certain way.
But that doesn't wipe out what happened
to those people when they were younger.
Just have a question from, uh, Mario Menno.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, kilda. Kay.
You referenced in your discussion, you, you used,
you talked about, it sounded like, uh, um,
the risk of attempt suicide or completion.
Do you, can you just talk a little bit more about why you
make that type type type of statement?
I have known a whole range of people who have been
in state care
or engaged with state treatment that in some cases
finally get to the point
where they think they will get justice
and then they get another slap in the face.
And another thing that delays,
and they're facing financial pressures.
They're trying to go straight to live within their means.
Food is hard, everything is hard.
And this promise of like gold at the end of the rainbow
that might have helped them get out of those situations,
it becomes more and more traumatizing.
So yes, the mental health, I have lost friends to
that despair over.
Um, it, it's not even sort of anger about what was done
to them, but it is the fact
that their hopes have been raised and then dashed down.
And that is part of the whole impact of, of
what this legislation does.
It's like, oh, we are offering you something.
The whole abuse and care, um, report all
of the recommendations, all of the processes,
and then the timeframe gets pushed out.
The actual part
of getting anything there becomes more and more impossible.
So people just give up.
Okay. Thank you. Kay. Um, thank you
for making the solution to the, uh,
committee this afternoon.
You Next, uh, submitter is, uh,
Ben Keith, I believe in person.
Uh, good afternoon, Ben. Welcome. Good evening.
Have five minutes with you this afternoon.
Time is yours. Thank
You Sarah Koto
and thank you to the committee
for the opportunity to be heard.
I appear both as an advocate for Ms. Leon McEnroe,
who unfortunately can't be here.
She had a prior commitment with her granddaughters out
of the country, but also as a lawyer who's worked
with issues of torture and abuse for more than 25 years.
I, as well as my work, former Ms.
McEnroe and other survivors, I have argued, for example,
the two cases, uh, that have gone to the Supreme Court
concerning torture one for the crown one against,
I will acknowledge Ms.
McEnroe. She needs little introduction.
As you know, she was honored by the king
and the New Year's honors
for her tireless work over the last 32 years
to gain redress.
She's still campaigning.
My starting point for
and respect of the bill is
that the committee has a formidable task
and formidable opportunity before it.
The committee has heard from survivors, has heard
of obstruction denial outright, um, deceit
over the past several decades, and I won't repeat that.
Instead, I'll make three points from a lawyer's perspective.
First is that redress requires a robust approach.
Supporters of the bill have made reference to the Australian
and Scottish schemes,
and those are very good solid statutes.
This bill is not, it does not create a
statutory reds scheme.
Instead, it relies upon an ad hoc mishmash of schemes,
and I don't use those words lightly.
Mm-hmm. Second point is
to acknowledge the Lake Alice scheme,
which I had the privilege to work with alongside Ms.
McEnroe and others. That scheme is not perfect,
but the responsible minister of the Honor, Erica Stanford
and Paul Davison, Casey, who came in as arbiter,
both gave it their absolute best I can say.
One particular point I make for the purpose
of the bill though, is that scheme was informed
by independent expert legal advice about the
crown's redress obligations.
And I'll come to those. This bill does not
have any trace of that.
There is no reference in the policy papers,
no reference in any of the provisions.
And the written submission sets out
what those redress obligations are to compensate,
rehabilitate, punish those responsible.
The bill does none of those things.
Third, three comments about the bill As it stands, one,
it continues that ad hoc approach.
And despite the models from other
jurisdictions, we have nothing here.
There's the Crown response office.
The policy agency has said there is further work to be done
to mid 2026.
Meanwhile, abuse survivors become older frailer,
and are still waiting for New Zealand
to follow other jurisdictions that have found this possible.
The difficulty is simply in taking up this challenge,
and I urge the committee to do that.
Second, in the mo I think the most, uh, controversial part
of the bill is constraining compensation
for individual offenders.
I can really only add a couple of perspectives.
I've dealt with the worst criminal offenders in the country.
Professionally, I can say I've also dealt
with a great deal of abuse and care.
The suggestion that one negates the other is not one
that a fair-minded person who knew that detail, who'd seen
that experience, uh, can consider.
And the simple point is this, whether
for an international lawyer, whether
for a black law letter lawyer where there is a wrong,
the wrongdoer must remedy, the crown must remedy.
There may be a private issue between a criminal offender
and his or her victim, but that does not excuse the crown
and can't point to something else.
And my last point about that, the committee will know well,
just how much of a bureaucracy,
how much money has gone into the architecture of redress?
The $774 million announced
by the government earlier this year to its credit,
more than two thirds goes to administrative overheads,
creating yet another office,
yet another process does very little.
My third point is about the final clause of the bill,
which says that apologies are not legally actionable
or not not legally relevant.
Apologies, as you all know, are a critical part of redress.
We all heard the Prime Minister's very solemn apology last
year to say that those are not legally valid,
not legally relevant.
Does his effort, does that obligation? No credit?
Um, I'd be happy to answer any
questions in the remaining time. Uh, thank you.
And Laura? Yeah, thanks very much. Um,
Ms. Thank for that.
Um, one of your, um, recommendations around the
res is in seven, your item 7.1.
In your submission, you say that restitution should,
wherever possible restore the survivor to the state that he
or she was in before the abuse.
Could you just expand on, um, the meaning behind that
or the situation that you can use as an example?
Yes, I'd be very happy to.
Um, we don't have a lot of experience of this in New Zealand
because we have a C, C,
but a CC is in some ways a good model too.
If I run someone over with my car, A CC will move mountains
to get that person back to work back on their feet.
If they're a young person, they will ensure
that they complete their education, that they're employable.
That is the obligation here. That is what restitution means.
Thank you. Right. Quick quick question. Mario Manal.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, Uh,
Ben, thank you very much.
I, uh, there was a number of points I noticed, uh, that I,
I'm interested in, but you used the words
and then you said, I don't use these very likely,
which is ad hoc and mishmash, which are kinda there,
there are in inside of a conversation such as this.
And given your experience, um, it, it's, that concerns me
that you would say that and, and
therefore, what might you say needs to undo that
ad hoc mishmash?
Um, that's one point. And the other goes
to the one does not negate to the other that, um, I think,
well, I've got it at 0.4 that talked about the constrained
around, um, um, criminal, um, activity.
Yeah. I'm just, um, both of those points I think are
of concern, particularly when you are noting them.
Thank you, mom. And I'll, I'll do my best
to be very quick in answering them, but,
but answer them as best I can.
The question, the point about mishmash ad hoc.
Over the last 20 odd years,
the government has formulated various redress schemes
and other jurisdictions, Scotland, Australia are too,
that officials are familiar with.
There is a statutory reduced scheme.
It is independent, it is legislated, it gives formal rights,
it gives independence.
We still have various schemes administered within MSD
administered within the Ministry of Health.
They're all different. They all put
survivors through different hoops.
They all yield variable outcomes.
If, if this bill did what its title said,
we would have a legislative scheme,
but there is no provision for that.
There are many, many models for it.
So, so I'm just saying that that's the missed opportunity,
that the one doesn't negate the other.
It's just back to a simple point.
I, and it is partly a personal perspective.
The fact that someone has committed an horrendous criminal
offense does not alter the fact
that they were abused terribly
by a state official as a child.
We have to address both sides of that coin saying that we,
we don't address this
because it might offend the other is, is an easy out.
It, it doesn't follow one,
one doesn't compute into the other.
Thank you, appreciate,
appreciate making your submission most.
Uh, our next, uh, seminar is Debbie ha via Zoom,
Kiara Koto.
Uh, Kiara. Debbie, thank you and welcome.
Uh, we have five minutes with you this
afternoon. Uh, the time is yours.
You, the people that this bill is seeking
to exclude from redress with children.
Children who were abused and harmed over and over again.
Some were harmed in tro through their parents alcohol use,
drug use through family violence in their homes.
Some children were harmed, um,
after they were born through family violence in their homes,
which is, may have been why they were
removed from their homes.
Some disabled children were harmed through the stigma
and discrimination of having learning difficulties of, um,
autism spectrum, of being physically disabled.
Then those children were harmed
by being removed from their families, from their communities
and put into institutions which they had no
choice in control over.
And then they were harmed by people in those institutions
who were paid to care for them.
All of those things, all of
that different harm creates trauma in children,
and that damages their brains
and it damages their brains in different ways.
It can just mean that children lose trust.
It can mean that children don't learn properly.
It can mean that children grow up without the resources
to do well and thrive as adults.
Some of them have real difficulty regulating their emotions.
None of those children, none of them asked for their lives
to go in the ways that they were.
And none of them was responsible
for those things that happened
to them when they were children.
And many, many of those people have received no help,
no resources, no safety
and nurturing, no environments that help them recover.
Obviously, I don't condone the crimes that these children
as adults have committed,
but I really believe we will.
You and you, the government only know about these people
and their crimes because they've been to court and
therefore they've been punished for them.
If they, if that hadn't
happened, you wouldn't know about them.
So they've paid their penalty, um,
under our legal system.
I really believe that this piece of legislation is the state
reab abusing those people
because it's saying once again that we take no notice
of the violence, the sexual violence, the physical violence,
the emotional violence, the trauma that was caused
to you in those early years of your life
by being taken from your homes, put into institutions
and then harmed.
We don't care about that. We want to keep punishing you.
I think everybody deserves redress for those experiences.
And I really also believe that apologies should mean sorry.
And so an apology should mean something in court everywhere.
I really think that this bill should be thrown out.
Thank you.
Um, thank, thank you. Debbie.
Can I just, can I just ask this question
because, um, the, the government has tried to
or has endeavored to draft a p of legislation to sort
of balance a number of different things.
And one is that, um,
although there is a presumption against someone who's
committed serious offending and has been sentenced to five
or more years imprisonment,
it doesn't rule out compensation.
Um, a number of things can be taken to account
to decide whether or compensation should be awarded,
including steps towards rehabilitation and,
and a number of other factors, including, I think, um,
times is the offending do, do you think that there's some,
um, merit to that approach?
No, no. Um, for a number of reasons.
One is that it doesn't
understand, I sorry, I can't think of the language,
but it doesn't, there's no understanding of the situation of
that person through their whole life.
With that, it doesn't explain whether they have any
resources to be able to recover themselves.
Um, I just think the whole thing is unfair.
Why would you put people through more hoops?
Why not just acknowledge the harm
and give them the compensation?
It's, um, it's kind of like means testing.
It seems unfair to me.
Uh, no. Um, thank, thank you, Debbie,
for making a submission to the committee this afternoon.
Thank you. Our next submitter is the
Royal Commission Forum via Zoom.
Uh, good evening is, uh, Steven Roly, um, appear on behalf
of the Royal Commission Forum.
So look, well welcome. We have Thanks Tim,
with you this afternoon.
You've, you've hopefully got yours, uh, ready.
You're ready to go with the sound system.
Uh, so look, um, when you're ready, the time is yours.
Thank you very much. Um, okay.
So myself and Rosalyn
and I, uh, we're gonna speak on behalf
of the Royal Commission Forum.
Just to let you know, the forum brings together people
who advocated for the establishment
of the Royal Commission to Abuse and Care.
We then served as an advisory body to the commission
during its tenure, and we continue to advocate for justice
for survivors of abuse and care.
Now, as you know, our submission strongly opposes this bill.
The bill is discriminatory.
It's unfair, it'll be costly,
and it fails to meet the demands for justice
that were endorsed by this government
during the parliamentary apology on 12 November, 2024.
The bill is a betrayal of the government's commitment
to survivors, and we urge the committee
to reject the bill in its entirety.
Instead, we would recommend
that the committee advise cabinet
that it adopt the recommendations of the Royal Commission
for an independent one stop redress process for survivors,
whether they were in the care of state
or faith-based institutions.
Now, I'm gonna lay out two key problems with this bill
and then hand over to Roslyn.
And we should finish in plenty of time for questions.
So, the primary problem
with this bill is its primary purpose, which is
to deny serious offenders access to financial redress.
That test is discriminatory
because it makes redress claim depend on irrelevant facts.
Redress is for abuse and care.
Any assessment about who gets redress should only concern
facts germane to the circumstances of abuse to do
otherwise dis inventory.
And I've heard you talk over the last little bit with other,
uh, submitters who, about the potential mitigating component
of the fact that there's a redress officer
that might be able to pay people.
But to mitigate discrimination is simply
to make discrimination, you know, slightly less bad, right?
It doesn't make the bill good.
You know, these are discriminatory components
and there are other ways in which we could do
serve the same outcomes.
So, you know, this is wrong,
and it puts New Zealand in violation
of international legal norms.
I'd refer the committee to the UN basic principles
and guidelines on the right to remedy
and reparations per victims of gross violations
of international human rights.
Those 2006 guidelines are the leading standard
for international law in this area.
And they require that redress policies be without quoting,
now be without discrimination of any kind
or any ground without exception,
not sometime exceptions without exception.
Yet, this bill is discriminatory
and our parliament should not enact discriminatory laws.
Now, let's turn to cost.
This bill requires the redress agencies gonna
complete criminal record checks on every survivor.
And if for all applicants to fill out a declaration
concerning their criminal history,
those provisions are insulting and they're prejudicial.
It's unclear why survivors being singled out like this.
Those provisions will also have a chilling effect on
applicants and applications creating more difficulties
and uncertainties for survivors.
It's also costly.
Well, the online sources, it's free for applicants.
It's gonna cost the taxpayers who underwrite the service,
but the relevant costs are not only monetary.
My research into redress program shows that
as administrative complexity increases the slower these
programs operate and the more they cost to administer.
And the cost of this bill must include the hiring employment
of the redress officer, who will,
of course be a senior government official expecting
commencement, remu remuneration and administrative support.
And the decisions of that officer are going
to be a well spending of litigation, uh,
costing taxpayer even more.
So, I'll hand over to Rosalyn.
Well, RA Steven, and
as Steven has said, we urge you to totally reject this bill
and advise the government to replace it with one
that reflects the recommendations of the report
of the Royal Commission on Abuse and Care.
Frankly, it's irredeemable,
but if you do persist with it,
at least consider the Scottish approach
that we document in our submission.
Steven has summarized some of the problems with this bill
to allow time for questions.
I'll very briefly outline some others.
The bill extends the disgusting discrimination
and denigration suffered by survivors of abuse and state
and face bath care
whenever they have sought redress since the 1970s,
as a previous submitter has said, it's re-traumatizing
as perpetuated for decades by ministers of the Crown,
senior government officials, and the judiciary.
Rather than taking a step towards a fairer
and just redress system, it prioritizes unnecessarily
the protection of the state's financial resources
and encourages impunity for those government agencies
and officials who were complicit in enabling the
abuse that took place.
Now, not one of those officials has been held
to account or suffered in any way,
and most of them receive salaries, annual salaries
twice as three times, four times as much
as any survivor has received.
The bill amounts to doub to double jeopardy those guilty
of serious crimes will already have been punished for them.
It, and it constructs yet another bureaucratic hurdle
to redress where most of the funding ends up.
Once again, as Ben Keith has said in the bureaucracy
and not in the survivor's pockets,
the survivors are chil uh, people who has children
or very disabled and vulnerable at adults
and care suffered appalling, physical, sexual, emotional,
psychological, and spiritual abuse.
In many cases, it's been found amounting to torture
and at the very least, a cruel and inhuman treatment.
In most cases, it was those experiences
that contributed substantially
to their subsequent criminal activities.
We acknowledge and draw your attention to the two law, uh,
society submissions, one on, on parole and prisoner's rights
and mental health and disability.
They provide detailed ev detailed documentation
of the most recent research evidence that that shows
that the consequences of abuse, that abuse
and childhood in their subsequent criminal offending.
Only by rejecting this bill can survivors of abuse
and care have any faith now in the institutions
of the state, such as being their experiences to date.
And we urge you to do so.
No, thank thanks, Rosalyn.
Um, so I, oh, I haven't got any bids
yet, so I'll I'll kick it off.
The first question, um, so you are looking at your, um,
written submission around the Scottish alternative.
That's the one you are recommending that this,
the burden approved needs to be on the state,
not the survivor.
Is that correct? This, the state must repay
would be against the public interest.
Sorry, just be really clear. Right.
We do not recommend the Scottish model. No, no.
But as a, the least bad of the alternatives, if, you know,
we don't just reject this bill out, right.
And move to something that was actually recommended
by the Royal Commission, which not draw your attention
to the fact the Royal Commission explicitly recommended
against its provisions, such as the one
that we are staring at in this bill.
Right. But if we ignore that
and we're gonna do something in this space,
the Scottish model, which shifts the burden of proof
to the state, having to show
that there's a prejudicial effect of giving money
to a particular individual,
that's obviously a better option than the
one we've got in front of us.
Sure, no, thanks for that clarification.
Um, the, uh, question,
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and
thank you for your submission.
Uh, do you believe that excluding survivors of abuse
and care from accessing redress
because of crimes they've been sentenced for
as a form of double jeopardy?
We absolutely do, and it clearly is
because they've already been punished
for those serious crimes.
Nobody's been punished for the crimes against them
as children and care, and yet they're being withheld
and have been for years withheld adequate redress
to enable them, you know, to have somewhat decent lives.
And in, in, in the cases we are talking about, many of them,
as you've heard, uh, elderly, frail, unwell,
and they've been waiting for the help that's never come.
Thank you. Um, Mr.
Chair, um, uh, I, um, I was connecting
to your discussion similar to Ben, um, Ben,
I think Ben Keith prior, so I just, so with, with all of
that in your discussion, what, what might you say motivates
or brings this kind of thinking to the floor?
What, what, what, what do you see is might be the motivation
behind such a thinking
and then, you know, making some leg on it?
Yeah, so I've, I've been, uh, involved with
survivors of abuse and care, you know,
from the time I was the New Zealand Chief Human Rights
Commissioner and, and since, so over 25 and more years.
And what I've witnessed is government officials at the most
senior level creating, first of all,
denying the facts, then creating a fearful picture
for cabinets, successive cabinets, labor,
and national, that this is going to be, you know,
financially open checkbook, you won't be able
to control it, et cetera, et cetera.
Plus, as well as that,
for reasons which I've never been able to understand
and unwillingness to acknowledge what their own agencies
have, where their own agencies have failed.
And, um, you know, and tho and,
and when you put those together and, and,
and when I saw this bill, I thought, this is just going back
to the two thousands.
This is exactly the same thing as the then, well,
she wasn't solicitor general at the time,
but the now solicitor general organized as, as,
and this came out in the Royal Commission,
organized a strategy for how, um,
all the government agencies, MSD, orang, tamari, health,
education, justice, could minimize
any possible acknowledgement of what had gone on
and minimize any possible, um, restitution.
Yeah. And this is what we're seeing in this bill.
And, and I do think,
and I mean obviously she's the
solicitor general, she's still there.
I thought this has got all her fingers, you know,
written over it, but also other senior government officials.
Thank you, Lyn. And what does, um,
we are over time at Will agenda,
real quick question if you can,
Uh, K Cordura, thank you very much
for your very clear submissions on, uh,
that particular part of the bill.
Was there anything you further you wanted to add about the,
um, apology, um, provisions in this bill?
Well, I'd just say it's disgusting.
I mean, how can you say, well,
you can give pretend apologies,
but in this, in the real world, in the world of, you know,
legal, um, commitments, they won't mean anything.
I mean, who even thought of that? It's so, it's so awful.
I mean, I feel really upset for survivors,
and I know it's been a shock for many survivors.
It really has, um, to discover that.
'cause they put a lot of faith in the Prime Minister's
apology and in, um, in the minister
Erica Stanford, you know, who, who I think has tried.
But this is, this is not a good outcome.
Well, uh, thank you both for making a solution, uh,
this evening to our, uh, committee.
And thank you very much for your time. Appreciate it.
Indeed. Thank you. Our next matter is Carl
tody Polley.
Yep.
Jordan welcome. Feels
Like I'm in a court, Some similarities,
but not quite, not the same.
It's got a lot of institutional processes and feels like I'm
A survivor. So,
Yeah. I look,
uh, we welcome and, uh, thank you for coming
and making a submission, uh, to the committee.
Um, and, and for your being, you've been here
for a little while, so bit look, uh,
but look, we have, um, uh, five minutes with you, um,
this afternoon or this evening rather.
But, uh, welcome and the time is yours.
Yeah, Kia, first of all, I just thought, um, I'll try
and compact everything in five minutes.
You know, I'd say it's a tough one. So anyway,
our lives begin to end when we stay silent
about the things that matter.
That's why I'm here today.
My name is Kyle Todi.
I'm a survivor of abuse
and state care, a Maori Scottish man,
a father, a grandfather, a great-grandfather, the founder
and current chair of the New Zealand collective of abused
and state here, charitable trust.
I speak today because silence is what allowed this harm
to continue for generations.
Like many children I dreams and
nor normal childhood as in my normal childhood.
Instead, I woke up in uni bozo,
I've already written, had it.
I've already made my written submission.
Today I want to speak to
what the bill does not want to hear.
Of course, I oppose the bill and so does our collective.
Let me be clear from the outset.
What happened in state care was not just abuse,
it was systemic violence, cultural destruction,
and crimes against children.
More importantly, against Maori children,
the be, uh, that matters
because the bill pretends those facts are historical details
instead of foundation of harm.
As a child in state, here I was subjected
to prolonged solitary confinement.
I practice now recognized internationally as cruel,
inhumane, and degrading treatment of children.
That experience has lifelong consequences,
which no redress process
can minimize or bureaucratized.
This bill affects us
and it affects our children and grandchildren.
And I'm ready to have my two nephews
and grand nephew will be here today.
The Royal Commission exposed many truths,
but it did not go far enough.
It failed to name the perpetrators.
It softened the language for the comfort of the state.
You cannot understand this harm without understanding the
culture of violence inside these institutions.
Violence was the language.
You became the animal you were expected to be
because survival required.
This was not education.
This was conditioning when you were released.
Nothing prepared you for the world.
No love, no trust, no stability,
only trauma, hyper vigilance and mistrust of authority.
Any redress system that does not confront this reality
or fail are survivors again.
And now, decades later, the state offers a redress system
that still controls the process, limits truth,
restricts, accountability,
and retraumatizes survivors by making them prove harm
that was already proven for Maori.
This is not separate from colonization,
removing our children, breaking
whakapapa genealogy.
I like to make sure that we get a clear understanding even
around pu so there's no misinterpretations
destroying language, identity and connection.
That is why many of us name this
and we call it cultural genocide.
This bill does not meet the gravity of crimes committed.
It prioritizes administrative convenience
over survivor's dignity.
It centers the crown, not the child.
I asked this committee to understand one thing.
Redress is not a transaction
is a moral obligation.
Until this bill names the truth centers survivors
and confronts the crimes committed against children,
especially Maori children.
What you decide here will either end the harm
of our children and our grandchildren
and our great-grandchildren,
or confirm that the state is still more comfortable
protecting itself than protecting our children.
Make no mistake, NZ cast
and survivors have survived everything imaginable.
We will survive this bill
and continue our work regardless of legislation.
All political cycles, survivors are organized.
Our language and culture are real,
and reclaiming our stories and,
and records through survivor led legal structures,
including international pathways, is firmly on the cards.
If theistic redress mechanism, uh, mechanism failed
to meet international human rights obligations,
survivors will pursue the appropriate
international pathways.
For context. I speak not only as a survivor,
but alongside my partner, penny Hoa, as co-founder
of AWA Inc.
34 years Mahi and te Motu,
and as the chair of the newly formed iwi na, Mohu
and Iwi, grounded in lived experience or survivors
and survival state harm and collective healing.
The intentions is to take these matters into
copa Maori spaces, including the
where issues of justice protection, of ana
and crown responsibility have long been addressed through.
And
Ami
Thank thank you.
We, we have gone quite a bit further,
but I, it was clear that it's important things to say.
So look, um, wanted to thank you for making this solution to
we thank your, um, nephew and your grand nephew for coming
and supporting you and clearly supporting you in the work
that you've been doing for a long time.
So, uh, that's very powerful.
That is very powerful. So thank you. Thank you.
So before, before we leave, I just wanted
to say, do the right thing.
Next submitter is, uh, Dr.
Ari what Ena
uh, good evening and welcome Dr.
Uh, we have, uh, five minutes with you, uh, this evening.
So look, when you're ready, the the time is yours.
My name is Ari, I'm,
and I'm a survivor of state abuse.
I want to acknowledge the speakers who were before me
and all those who have spoken today opposing this bill.
I'm here to oppose this bill because,
because it's not a redress system,
it's a liability containment strategy.
I'm here to talk to five particular points. Point one.
This bill codifies a conflict of interest.
The crown is asking survivors to submit to a redress process
controlled by the very institution that abused them.
No credible justice system allows a perpetrator to one,
design the process to set the limits.
Three, control disclosure,
and four cap the consequences.
Yet that is exactly what this bill does.
If the structure were proposed in any other context,
it would be rejected immediately.
As procedurally unfair survivors are being asked
to accept a standard of justice
the state would never accept for itself.
Point two, the bill is designed to protect the state
from legal consequences.
This bill does not merely offer redress.
It actively shields state agencies from legal liability.
That is not accidental.
It is the point the architecture
of this bill prioritizes.
One, reducing civil exposure.
Two, closing future claims, three,
and limiting financial risk to the crown
that reveals the true motivation.
Here, the state is more concerned with
how it looks politically than with
what justice actively requires.
A system built to protect the state cannot simultaneously
claim to center survivors.
Those two objectives are incompatible.
Three, apologies are being used
as substitutes for accountability.
The bill allows a crown to issue generic apologies
without binding admissions of wrongdoing
or enforceable reform.
That is not accountability. It is narrative management.
Survivors are being offered words in exchange for silence
closure in exchange for truth
and finality in exchange for justice.
If the crown was serious about accountability,
this bill would require full disclosure.
Institutional admissions, an ongoing oversight.
It does not. Four, this bill continues colonial control
over Maori survivors.
Maori were disproportionately taken into state care
and disproportionately abused.
Yet this bill does not guarantee.
Maori governance does not based justice
and does not recognize intergenerational trauma.
Or instead, Maori survivors are again, required
to place themselves under state authority
and crown definitions of justice that is not redress,
that is continuity of colonial power.
But under a different name, 0.5
survivors are coerced into trading justice for money.
This bill pressure survivors to waive their rights
to civil action in exchange for cap crown approved payments.
That is coercion not choice only one party
benefits from that trade.
And that is the state. Our reduced system worthy
of the name will expand survival options.
This bill narrows them deliberately.
So in conclusion, the bill does not
represent moral reckoning.
It represents the state drawing a line under
its own wrongdoing.
When parliament legislates we address,
it protects the state from survivors.
It is not ending abuse. It is formalizing it.
Thank you for making a, a very concise
and um, articulate submission.
I thank you. Thank you for repairing
in front of the, the committee this afternoon.
It's, uh, something else for us to, uh,
take into consideration, your Honor.
The next seminar is, uh, Kenneth Clearwater via Zoom.
Good evening, Kenneth. I, uh, see you.
Uh, I you look like you're off mute.
So look, uh, when you're ready.
We have five minutes with you this evening
and the time Will is yours.
Kiara, thank you very much. Can you hear me?
We certainly can. Thank you. Uh,
Uh, I'm Ken Cle.
I'm one of the former commissioners from the Royal
Commission into Abuse and Care,
and I have also spent 30 over 30 years working with state
and faith-based, uh, survivors of abuse and care.
I wanna thank you for giving me this opportunity to speak
to this Ill-advised Bill
and I agree with, uh, Steven and Rosalyn.
This bill should be absolutely rejected
and I support everything Celine and Isabella
and Karl and Ra.
We have said in relation to Kipa Maori.
I'd like to start with a quote from Maki.
You can push people into the shadows,
but the shadows tell their own story.
You can remove a patch, but not the pain that created it.
You, you can disperse people
but not disperse the history that shaped them.
You can silence symbols,
but not silence the lived experience beneath them.
When I sat in parliament on the 12th of November, 2024,
leaders from all political parties apologized to victims
of state and faith-based care.
And to me, and to many, we felt the time had come.
When you apologize for evil wrongdoings,
that means you take responsibility.
We heard the words and we waited for the actions.
A year later, the actions to date have,
in many cases been re-traumatizing and demeaning.
This bill adds to that the system you believe in
and work in, raped
and tortured innocent, vulnerable children, young people,
your system was supposed to protect and nurture.
While in your system's boot camps, vulnerable,
frightened young people were made to dig their own graves
and kneel down on them.
Where the caregivers, your system's caregivers, fired shots
above their heads and watched as they s**t
and p**s themselves.
Those victims all ended up in your prison system.
Children who were stripped naked
and forced into a coffin in a church
with a dead nun while the religious brothers
masturbated them.
Then the system you protect,
release them into the community with no skills.
Apart from fear, anger,
and hatred, leading to alcohol, drugs, violence, and gangs.
You expected them to be normal.
Your system created the problem.
Your system failed, the vulnerable your system owes,
yet your system is hell bent on replenishing those you
raped and tortured.
So I beg the question.
Did all the leaders make their apologies without reading the
Royal Commission report
and just wanted to look good for the public?
Did the people who came up
with this lame bill read the Royal Commission report
or just look at the pictures in closing?
After many submissions over the years to select committees,
I know those who like myself working on the coalface are
ignored by policymakers.
Frontline people and agency this year have had their funding
cut or contracts ended, people cleaning up this mess.
Minister Paula Bennett once says to me, Ken,
don't bring me your problems.
Bring me solutions. Frontline worker solutions are ignored.
So why would I bother being here today?
'cause I need to sleep at night.
I know personally what it's like to be raped as a child
and seen as a second class citizen.
I need to know, unlike many in this country,
that I have tried my best to protect our children.
New Zealand consistently ranks poorly for child abuse,
often cited as having one of the worst rates
among developed nations.
And the issues we face
before this committee were created by your system.
We should all be ashamed of that.
You all see the adults when they were raped and tortured in
and by your system, they were vulnerable,
innocent, scared children.
Will this committee do what's best for victim survivors
or what's best for political wellbeing?
I've done and will continue to do my bit
for our children in all state and faith-based survivors.
Will you as a select committee do yours?
The Royal Commission recommendations is a blueprint
for a better RO in New Zealand,
and I feel that most have failed to read
and look into those recommendations.
Who are
Right. Well, thank Thank
you, Ken.
Um, um, we, we, we, um, yeah, there's quite a, quite a, uh,
a lot in that submission.
Um, that's a lot to process, frankly.
But, uh, look, thank you for coming
and sharing that with the committee.
Uh, it's, it's certainly a very powerful one, um,
and, um, something for us to consider.
But, um, yeah, look, um, thank you. Thank you.
Our next submitter is the, uh, law Association
of New Zealand via Zoom.
Good evening, uh, Hannah and Kate.
Um, and welcome to the, uh,
social Service Committee Committee.
Uh, so we have, uh, 10 minutes with you, uh,
this afternoon or this evening rather.
Um, so when you're ready, the time is yours.
Yeah. And good evening to you all.
Uh, my name is Kate mackay
and I'm a member of the Law Association's Mental Health
and Disability Law Committee, which I'll be
presenting on behalf of today.
I'll be speaking to my submission first
before handing over to Hannah.
So, in the interest of time, I wish
to highlight two key parts of our submission.
Firstly, the connection between historical abuse
and later offending behavior.
And secondly, the pro, the potential
for the presumption against redress
to re-traumatize survivors.
So firstly, as you would've seen in our written submission,
there is substantial
and significant research around the impact of trauma, uh,
that survivors of abuse and care have suffered
and the effects of that later in life, particularly in,
in relation to aggressive and violent conduct.
And I do wish to note
that this connection was acknowledged in the Bill's
departmental disclosure statement.
So the impacts are wide ranging.
Survivors can become desensitized to abusive behavior, uh,
with the effect of normalizing such behavior, uh,
leaving survivors to think this is just the way people act.
This is the way how people deal with things.
Sexual aggression has been significantly associated
with being sexually abused as a child,
which we know from the Royal Commission was
very common in state care.
Uh, and particularly when per perpetrated
by an adult in a caregiving role.
Survivors can also develop maladaptive coping strategies
to deal with the abuse, uh, many of which are associated
with criminal behavior, uh, such as
substance and alcohol abuse.
Now, further research has also shown that the impact
of all this has quite literally had the effect
of rewiring survivor's brains.
So the research tells us that we're all born
with our own unique set of genes,
uh, what they call a blueprint.
And this guides how, uh, our brains will develop,
but it's the environment we grow up in that, uh,
determines exactly how this eventuates.
So if someone grows up in a volatile,
abusive environment like many who, uh, were abuse
and SafeCare did, uh, they can experience issues
with emotional and behavior regulation, have higher rates
of psychiatric disorders, relational issues
and engagement in high risk antisocial activities, which
as we know are all associated with criminal offending.
Now, this doesn't mean that all survivors will offend,
but without effective state and intervention
and support, it lays the foundations
and makes it a much more likely possibility.
Now, the Royal Commission has backed this research.
It's found that one in three children
and young people in state care later
served a prison sentence.
And we also know that three quarters
of New Zealand prisoners have been exposed
to serious violence in their lifetime.
And that is why our committee is submitting
that the bill must take this research into account
and ensure that the bill is based on robust scientific
evidence that puts survivors in their interest at the
forefront, and including a presumption against redress
for serious offenders does not account for this.
Now, I also wish to speak to the potential of the bill
to re-traumatize survivors of abuse
and care all over again, particularly its requirement
for survivors or survivors to consent
to a criminal record check
or risk committing an offense punishable by a fine of up
to $5,000 in the district court.
So as the Royal Commissioners acknowledged, violations
of privacy were a very common method used
by abusers against survivors of abuse and care.
And it was often the very first thing
to go upon arrival in care facilities
with an incredibly dehumanizing effect.
There is potential for this process that the bill creates
to trigger these painful memories for survivors
of having no control
and limited agency over their own
personal privacy and dignity.
It also risks further criminalizing
or needlessly introducing survivors into
the criminal justice system.
And as we've also acknowledged, uh,
survivors are far more likely than the rest
of the population to have interacted
with the criminal justice system.
And as the commissioners also noted, uh, they have found
that the justice system itself completely failed
to protect survivors for the many decades
that the abuse went on for.
So it also serves to remind survivors seeking financial
redress that the state always has the ultimate control,
the final say.
And even after the Royal Commission
and the government apology last year,
that survivors still have very little
self-determination in the process.
It's incredibly disempowering
and it significantly deviates from the trauma-informed
system that the Royal Commission recommended
and the one that is absolutely necessary
to adequately support and compensate survivors.
So that concludes the submissions on my part.
Thank you all for your time tonight,
and I'll now pass over to Hannah.
Thank you. Thank you.
Although from a different subcommittee, um,
within the Law Association Parole
and Prisoners Rights Committee, entirely agree
and endorse, the mental health committee had said in regards
to the bill, um, the true intent of the bill appears to be,
to make it more difficult,
and this means practically as well as emotionally
and psychologically for the survivors
to seek redress if they fit in the category of violent and
or sexual offenders as described within the bill.
If this is indeed the true intent of the bill,
our committee fundamentally opposes it.
The bill also fails to endorse ears of research conducted
and talked about at the Royal Commission
of Inquiry into abuse and care and ignore its findings.
You would've read, uh, written submissions already.
So, um, I'll just concentrate on a few details instead.
Um, the committee raises concern over the application
process, uh, pursuant to section 20 of the bill,
which talks about rehabilitation.
Rehabilitation is a great concept if it is possible.
As a co convener of a parole
and prisoners rights committee,
I have seen a steady decline in relation
to the program providers as well
as psychological assessments and
or treatments within the prison.
Over the years. We now get comments from the parole board
members themselves, suggesting to us
to seek private psychologists
as prisons simply cannot afford it.
One of the purposes of correction system is
to assist in the rehabilitation
and their reintegration into the community as we see it.
Prisons have been understaffed, under-resourced
and invested other than of course, the plan
to build bigger and more prisons.
Prisons have been struggling to keep up with exploding pros,
prison population, which has worsened recently despite
their best efforts.
It is often not due to prisoners'.
Lack of motivation
to engage in rehabilitation is quite the opposite.
A lot of our clients want to do programs, they want to work
outside, they want to receive, treat training,
and, um, treatment prisons often struggle to provide it.
So what happens then?
Where is the accountability of on the state who has failed
to fulfill their duty to provide opportunities for prisoners
to rehabilitate the bill may create a vicious cycle.
Most of our legally deli, uh,
legally aid clients are from marginalized
sector of our community.
They often are from challenging and complicated background,
and their childhood can sometimes be
described as horrendous.
This is not the first time our committee is making
submissions before the select committee opposing law
reform under this government.
Every time we do, I'm amazed at lack of understanding
or inability to understand the concept
of victim and offenders.
There isn't always a clear line between victim and offender.
One day I'll have a client who's charged with an offense
and appear as a defendant.
The next day, the same client will come as a victim
or a victim's family to support.
The line between victim and offenders are very much blurred.
I've never seen a client who became a gang member,
who hasn't been abandoned by their own family
or been a victim of some crime themselves.
There were ones victims too.
You must know about statistics
and the overwhelming volume of research
that connects offending behavior from past abuse.
Under stake care, this bill may worsen.
The survivor's already lost faith in the system.
If the state wishes to correct
or wrong, then it should do so without discrimination.
The concept that a number of politicians seem to rely on
to justify the stance of the bill,
that it would somehow offend victims of their own crime.
I would like to point out the findings
of the survey conducted by the Human Rights Commission
on Royal Commission.
Overwhelming majority
of New Zealanders want the state to do the right thing.
78%
or respondents agree that New Zealand can afford
to address abuse and care if it chooses to prioritize it.
I still remember you, Mr. Mooney, back in the days fighting
for your clients in South Auckland.
Despite all the challenges
and doubts, you fought fearlessly and you protected them.
I would like to see you and others to do the right thing
and restore what the bill should really be about.
The bill should be about correcting a wrong,
accepting accountability, thereby restoring people's manner
and dignity so they can have a better future,
not about requiring survivors to pass the character test.
Thank you.
Um, thank, thank you Hannah
and Kate, you say, I do remember Hannah working with you
as a, as a colleague in, in the criminal, uh, court system.
Um, uh, well, uh, so, um, look, Phil, thank you for that.
We, we are almost at time.
Um, I I guess the, the only thing I I'd ask is just on
that point, and I, I take, I take the point, um, about
that connection often between the offender and the offending
and the victim and the victimizer.
Um, it's,
it's not always the case though, or make that point.
Um, the, the other thing I'd just say is just this,
obviously this, um, bill is, is trying to strike a balance
between, um, the, the level of gravity of the offending
and then having a, a, a mechanism in place.
And with that, I note the point to made in the,
the redress officer who would have a, a critical role
to play in determining whether
or not someone who falls in that category of, you know,
five years more imprisonment and serious of, um, violence
or sexual offending.
And you've made some recommendations in the,
in the written submission around their role
and ensuring that that is a, um, a, a robust role.
I just wonder if you could just talk, take us quickly
to the key points you think would help
strengthen the role of the redress officer.
Who would've that critical role to play
and the billers is currently drafted?
Well, um, our committee's position is that, um,
we're fundamentally opposing it.
Um, but given the government's recent approaches in terms
of law reform, um, we fear that it will pass
and our position, um, to minimize the damage is
to suggest those recommendations.
Um, um, obviously, um, we would like
to see some independent system that will, uh, oversee, um,
such a change, um, which was one of the, um,
recommendations made, made by Royal Commission.
Um, but I know that time is very late, so, um,
I'll leave the, the, um, panel to uh,
uh, read written submissions
and I'm happy to, yeah, happy to discuss it later,
Mr. Mooney, if there is more time.
Okay, great. Now thank, thank you Hannah and Kate.
Appreciate your time this evening.
Thank you. Thank you.
Our next submitter is Aaron Douglas, also via Zoom.
Alright, Good evening, Aaron. Uh, thank you.
Thank you for, we're running a little bit over time,
but look, thank you for staying around and, um,
and making a submission.
So we have five minutes with you this evening
and the time is yours when we're ready.
Aaron Douglas. My name is Aaron Douglas.
And for transparency purposes, I feel the need
to declare upfront that I'm both an Anglican priest
and an an employee of the Department of Corrections, neither
of which I represent tonight.
Thank you. Fundamentally, I believe that this bill is flawed
and perpetuates more violence by the state upon persons
who have been victim of violence
at a vulnerable age in the care of the state.
Secondly, I believe that the bill proposes to legislate
for a double jeopardy whereby we are
punishing persons twice.
Having said that, I have re-read the bill closely
and take seriously.
Section 10 B four,
whereby the redress officer has, has to apply a,
an understanding of the sensitivity to an understanding
of the impact of crime on victims.
Personally, I believe
that the bill in its current form is blunt
and lacks the necessary nuance
to be serious about the impact of crime on victims.
As Hannah and our last submission discussed,
there are plenty of persons
with criminal histories inflicting ongoing harm to victims
who won't be captured in the narrow nature of this bill.
If a form of this bill is to become law, I humbly suggest
that a mechanism is created for escalating all claims
for redress by persons with a criminal history.
In addition, I believe the bill must remove the presumption
against financial redress.
All claims by persons who have been convicted
of crimes could undergo the type of scrutiny required
of the redress officer in sections in section 20,
subsection two
and four, whereby more information is sought
and gathered to assess the claim.
A redress system needs to hear the claimant's story
to identify a package of redress that offers healing,
support, and hope for a future
financial redress may
or may not be be an appropriate response.
I believe that this bill is poorly crafted
and should be returned to the house with a recommendation
that it progress no further the crown can
and must do better than what this bill offers
to survivors abuse and state care.
Thank you very much.
Uh, thank you very Sharon, for making a, um, very, uh,
concise, um, and, um, submission.
And also thank for your written submission.
Shall we should help her read that as well.
Um, members, uh, Maureen,
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, thank you Erin.
Um, I'm, I'm interested in the submissions from people
who say to send this bill back, uh,
because if we do that, the whole thing starts again.
So is there something in here that you can suggest?
'cause we don't want to delay this for victims either, so
I mean, you've made, um, made
Some hence my, yeah, my humble suggestion this Eve,
I'm on holiday and this came
to me this afternoon while driving.
Oh, okay. Um, so my, if this bill is
to progress to law, I believe it needs
to be more nuanced than its current blunt form of,
of excluding financial redress for persons who have offended
with serious violence for sexual offenses.
Okay. Because there are persons who have continue to offend,
uh, fraud, dishonesty, drug offenses that are causing
considerable harm to society on an ongoing basis, um,
presently today that won't be captured in this.
But a redress package, um, for them may include
a, the, the right rehabilitative or, um, health
or social services, um, support to,
to address their criminogenic or health
or mental health reasons causing them to offend.
So are you saying or, or, or, and, and
I'm saying we expand those that get sent to a,
to greater scrutiny for redress.
So if, if, if we were to,
if the bill goes forward, then all persons
who have a criminal history should go to further, um,
for further scrutiny to ensure that the, the best package
of redress to support them
and to a bright future is able to be offered.
Excellent. Thank you. Uh, thank you.
I, um, I know you mentioned in your, in your submission,
but do you believe that excluding survivors of abuse
and care from accessing redress
because they've been sentenced
for a crime is double jeopardy?
I do. Which is why I'm not saying to exclude them.
I'm saying that there needs to be a mechanism to ensure
that, um, the package is able
to address their nuanced needs.
Right. Thank. Thanks, Aaron. Yeah. Oh yeah.
No, I think, um, thank you
for making a submission this afternoon,
um, or this evening rather.
And, uh, look, uh, thank you for coming in on,
on your holiday and wish you all the best with the,
uh, remainder of your holiday.
Sure. Done You right.
Now, um, last
but not least minute, uh, also
by Zoom is Andrew Godard this evening.
Uh, Andrew, welcome. Uh, thank you for, uh, staying online.
We, we have been running a little bit over.
Uh, we're trying to make sure everyone gets
a chance to, uh, be heard.
So look, thank you for preparing for us this afternoon.
The time is yours and when you are ready.
Um, thank you for the opportunity to speak
to my submission, which I'm making in a personal capacity.
I'm conscious, I'm, I'm last, so I'll try to be brief.
I just wanna admit here quickly to those who have spoken
before me, uh,
and in particular the survivors who have presented today.
I do not support the bill.
It is inconsistent with the Royal Commission's considered
recommendations relating to redress
and in particular that the entire redress scheme should be
independent and open to all survivors,
including those with the criminal record.
And I also want to stress
that the bill will not just affect the estimated 5%
of survivors who have committed serious
offenses as defined in the bill.
It will and it will disproportionately so,
but not exclusively.
It will affect every survivor who applies
because every survivor must consent
to a criminal record check
and make a declaration as to their criminal history.
Uh, which seems to me to be completely unnecessary
and not to mention completely unfair.
Uh, however, on the assumption that the bill is likely
to proceed, I'll focus my time on two,
maybe three issues I consider need urgent attention.
Uh, first pause.
19 of the bill provides
that the redress officer may only determine
that an affected survivor is eligible
for financial redress if satisfied
that it would not bring the redress scheme into disrepute.
The policy rationale, as I understand it, is
that there needs to be independent consideration in these
cases to avoid, to bring, bring the scheme into disrepute.
Uh, however it doesn't follow
that the test needs to use that language.
Exactly. Uh, disrepute test
is more commonly used in regulating professional conduct,
and I submit that it's ill suited as a test
to whether a remedy should be made available.
Uh, my submission is that if the bill is to proceed,
that the presumption should be reversed
and that the test should be whether withholding the payment
is in the interests of justice.
After all, this is fundamentally a question of justice.
Uh, I would also like to see the matters.
Uh, the officer must consider, um,
include information relating
to the abuse the survivor suffered, uh,
and including the trauma they have had to live with since.
And at the moment, it does not, uh, that
or those changes would retain the independent consideration,
I think the bill is trying to achieve, uh,
while offering a test that is less likely
to unjustly restrict access to financial redress
for those affected survivors.
Um, the second point I want to speak to is that clause eight
of the bill applies most
of the bills operative provisions retrospectively to nine,
May, 2025.
Retrospective application of the law requires good reasons.
And the only rationale
provided in this case that I'm aware of is
that the government announced the core policy
of the bill on that date.
And frankly, that is completely inadequate
as a justification for retrospective retrospective law.
It also, uh, as the Law Society has pointed out,
gives improper weight to a public statement
made by the executive.
So my recommendation would be
to remove clause eight entirely.
Uh, however, I am,
I'm most concerned about the retrospective application
of the offense provisions and clauses 23
and 24 retrospective offense provisions are about
as serious a breach of fundamental constitutional principles
and of the Bill of Rights Act, as you could imagine.
Uh, so,
sorry, I seem to have frozen. I'm not sure.
Yeah, we got you back now.
Oh, pretty good.
Not sure it's entirely working with working for me,
but I think that the point I'm really trying to make is
that, yeah, that those respective, um, uh,
offense provisions really need to be removed from the bill.
I know the law society has, I think suggested, uh,
uh, rather than, than
that removing the offense provisions in their entirety, uh,
I would also support that as a means
for addressing my concerns.
Uh, and I think I'll, I think I'll leave it there, uh,
if indeed I'm still with you.
Yep. No, no, we, uh, we still do have you.
So I think, I think we've got,
I think we've got all the points you've made and,
and we do have your comprehensive written submission
as well, uh, which has been helpful.
Um, so look, I thank you.
We do one quick question, if anyone has one.
Um, otherwise we think we will wrap it up for the evening.
Alright. We don't, um, look, I think, I think you have, um,
uh, yeah, made those points very clearly
and we do have written submission.
Um, and thank you for yeah, very clear,
um, oral submission as well.
Just major points very clearly. So appreciate it.
No, you're welcome. Thank you. And good luck. Thank you.
Okay, good evening. And it's frozen again.
Alright, well that concludes our, um, hearing
for this evening.